yasminnetadvibhātaṃ yata idamabhavadyena cedaṃ ya eta-
dyo'smāduttīrṇarūpa: khalu sakalamidaṃ bhāsitaṃ yasya bhāsā |
yo vācāṃ dūradūre punarapi manasāṃ yasya devā munīndrā:
no vidyustattvarūpaṃ kimu punarapare kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste ||1||
yasmin-etat-vibhātaṃ	on which (base) this (universe) is manifested
yata:-idam-abhavat-	from which this (universe) became
yena ca-idaṃ ya etat-	with which (into which) it merges, which itself is this (universe)
ya:-asmāt-uttīrṇa-rūpa:	who from this is transcended form
khalu sakalam-idaṃ bhāsitaṃ	indeed all this illumined (universe)
yasya bhāsā	whose illumination (it is)
ya: vācāṃ dūra-dūre	that who is from description far beyond
puna:-api manasāṃ	again also from mind's concept
yasya devā munīndrā:	whose the gods and great sages
no vidyu:-tattvarūpaṃ	do not know true nature
kimu puna:-apare	what of others
kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste	to that Krishna, salutations
It is Brahaman itself, on whose base this universe is manifested, from which this universe became, into which it merges, which itself is the universe, who is transcended from this all, from whose illumination the universe is illumined, whose illumination it is. Again, who is far beyond all description and also from the mind's conception. Whose true nature the gods and sages do not know, what of other lesser beings. To That Krishna, Brahaman itself, salutations.
janmātho karma nāma sphuṭamiha guṇadoṣādikaṃ vā na yasmin
lokānāmūtaye ya: svayamanubhajate tāni māyānusārī |
vibhracchaktīrarūpo'pi ca bahutararūpo'vabhātyadbhutātmā
tasmai kaivalyadhāmne pararasaparipūrṇāya viṣṇo namaste ||2||
janma-atha: karma nāma	birth, then activity certainly
sphuṭam-iha	clearly here
guṇa-doṣa-ādikaṃ	(comprising of) of Gunas' faults etc.,
vā na yasmin	or in whom (there is)
lokānām-ūtaye	for the world's protection
ya: svayam-anubhajate	who himself undertakes
tāni māyā-anusārī	those according to Maayaa
vibhrat-śaktī:-arūpa:-api	projecting the power (of Vidyaa and Avidyaa), also formless
ca bahutara-rūpa:-avabhāti-	and many forms taking
adbhut-ātmā	of wonderful nature
tasmai kaivalya-dhāmne	for him liberation personified
para-rasa-paripūrṇāya	Supreme Bliss Infinite
viṣṇo namaste	O Vishnu! Salutations to Thee
Clearly here in this world, for its protection, Thou do take birth, activity, name etc., by Thy power of Maayaa, comprising of the Gunaas and Vidyaa and Avidyaa. O Thou of wonderful nature! O Home of liberation! Though formless, Thou do take on many forms. O Vishnu! Supreme Bliss Infinite! Salutations to Thee.
no tiryañcanna martyaṃ na ca suramasuraṃ na striyaṃ no puṃmāṃsaṃ
na dravyaṃ karma jātiṃ guṇamapi sadasadvāpi te rūpamāhu: |
śiṣṭaṃ yat syānniṣedhe sati nigamaśatairlakṣaṇāvṛttitastat
kṛcchreṇāvedyamānaṃ paramasukhamayaṃ bhāti tasmai namaste ||3||
no tiryañcam-na martyaṃ	not bird or animal nor human being
na ca suram-asuram	and not god or demon
na striyaṃ no puṃmāṃsaṃ	not a woman or a man
na dravyaṃ karma jātiṃ	not a substance, function, species
guṇam-api	attributes also
sat-asat-vā-api	existent or non existent also
te rūpam-āhu:	Thy form is said to be
śiṣṭaṃ yat syāt-	left over whatever is
niṣedhe sati nigama-śatai:-	negated having been by several Upanishads
lakṣaṇa-āvṛttita:-tat	by references implied, that
kṛcchreṇa-āvedyamānaṃ	with difficulty made to know
parama-sukhamayaṃ bhāti	the Supreme Bliss shines
tasmai namaste	to That Thee salutations
Thy form is said to be, by the wise, of neither bird or animal or of a human being, a god or a demon, a woman or a man, nor is it substance, function, species or attribute, existent or non existent. By such negations by several Upanishads, what is left over, is with great difficulty and implied references made to be known as the Supreme Bliss that shines. To That Thee, salutations.
māyāyāṃ bimbitastvaṃ sṛjasi mahadahaṅkāratanmātrabhedai-
rbhūtagrāmendriyādyairapi sakalajagatsvapnasaṅkalpakalpam |
bhūya: saṃhṛtya sarvaṃ kamaṭha iva padānyātmanā kālaśaktyā
gambhīre jāyamāne tamasi vitimiro bhāsi tasmai namaste ||4||
māyāyāṃ bimbita:-tvaṃ	in Maayaa reflected Thou
sṛjasi mahat-ahaṅkāra-	do project Mahat, Ahankaara
tanmātra-bhedai:-	the (five) Tanmaatraas, different
bhūta-grāma-indriya-ādyai:-api	the elements' group, senses etc., also
sakala-jagat-	the whole universe
svapna-saṅkalpa-kalpam	like a dream projected article
bhūya: saṃhṛtya sarvaṃ	again withdrawing everything
kamaṭha iva padāni-	like a tortoise, its legs
ātmanā kālaśaktyā	by Thy own Kaal Shakti
gambhīre jāyamāne tamasi	in the intense produced darkness
vitimira: bhāsi	free from that darkness, Thou do shine
tasmai namaste	to That Thee salutations
Thou do reflect Thyself in Thy Maayaa, and project the Mahat (whole creation), Ahankaar (Ego), the five different Tanmaatraas (sound, touch,form,taste and smell), the group of five elements (fire,earth, space, air and water), and the senses and the mind etc., also. The whole universe is projected like a dream and the articles in the dream. Again withdrawing everything into Thyself with Thy power of Kaal (Time), like the tortoise drawing in its legs, an intense darkness is produced. Unaffected by this darkness, Thou do shine. To That Thee salutations.
śabdabrahmeti karmetyaṇuriti bhagavan kāla ityālapanti
tvāmekaṃ viśvahetuṃ sakalamayatayā sarvathā kalpyamānam |
vedāntairyattu gītaṃ puruṣaparacidātmābhidhaṃ tattu tattvaṃ
prekṣāmātreṇa mūlaprakṛtivikṛtikṛt kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste ||5||
śabda-brahma-iti	Primeval Sound, as
karma-iti-aṇu-iti	Karma as, as Atom,
bhagavan	Lord!
kāla iti-ālapanti	as time, thus speak of
tvām-ekaṃ viśva-hetuṃ	Thou one only cause of the universe
sakalamayatayā	being in everything
sarvathā kalpyamānam	in every way conceivable
vedāntai:-yattu gītaṃ	by Vedaant, what is stated
puruṣa-para-cit-ātmā-	Purush, Supreme Being, Pure Consciousness, Aatman,
abhidhaṃ tattu tattvaṃ	is called, that reality alone
prekṣā-mātreṇa	by (whose) just a glance
mūla-prakṛti-vikṛti-kṛt	the Moola Prakriti's (Maayaa's) modification caused
kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste	O Krishna! Salutations to Thee
O Lord! Thou being the only one cause of the universe, being in everything and conceivable in everything are described as and are spoken of as the Primeval Sound, Karma, Atom, Time and so on. In Vedaant that reality alone is called Purusha, Supreme Being, Pure Consciousness and Aatma, and by whose mere glance causes Maayaa to project the universe with various modifications. O Lord Krishna! salutations to Thee.
sattvenāsattayā vā na ca khalu sadasattvena nirvācyarūpā
dhatte yāsāvavidyā guṇaphaṇimativadviśvadṛśyāvabhāsam |
vidyātvaṃ saiva yātā śrutivacanalavairyatkṛpāsyandalābhe
saṃsārāraṇyasadyastruṭanaparaśutāmeti tasmai namaste ||6||
sattvena-asattayā vā	by existing or non existing
na ca khalu sadasattvena	and not indeed by (both) existing and nonexisting
nirvācyarūpā dhatte	inexplicable causes
yā-asau-avidyā	which this Avidyaa (ignorance)
guṇa-phaṇi-mati-vat-	rope snake concept like
viśva-dṛśya-avabhāsam	the universe projection appearance
vidyātvaṃ sā-eva yātā	becoming Vidyaa (knowledge) that itself becomes
śruti-vacana-lavai:-	with some few statements of Vedas
yat-kṛpā-syanda-lābhe	which along with the grace stream getting
saṃsāra-araṇya-sadya:-	the world forest quickly
truṭana-paraśutām-eti	to cut, an axe becomes
to That Thee salutations
Avidyaa, ignorance, which cannot be described as existent or non existent or even both, projects the objective world, just as a rope is projected as a snake. When Avidyaa gets transformed into Vidyaa as a result of God's grace flowing like a stream, coupled with hearing of some statements of the scriptures, it becomes the axe which cuts the forest of the objective world. O Lord! to That Thee salutations.
bhūṣāsu svarṇavadvā jagati ghaṭaśarāvādike mṛttikāva-
ttattve sañcintyamāne sphurati tadadhunāpyadvitīyaṃ vapuste |
svapnadraṣṭu: prabodhe timiralayavidhau jīrṇarajjośca yadva-
dvidyālābhe tathaiva sphuṭamapi vikaset kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste ||7||
bhūṣāsu svarṇa-vat-vā	in ornaments like gold,or
jagati ghaṭa-śarāva-ādike	in the universe, in earthen pots and vessels etc.,
mṛttikāvat-	clay like
tattve sañcintyamāne	in the nature of reality, reflecting
sphurati tat-adhunā-api-	shines that, even now
advitīyaṃ vapu:-te	the non dual self of Thine
svapna-draṣṭu: prabodhe	for the dreamer, on waking up
timira-laya-vidhau	when darkness vanishes, that state (of light)
jīrṇa-rajjo:-ca yat-vat-	worn out rope that, similarly
vidyālābhe tathā-eva	on gaining Vidyaa (knowledge) thus only
sphuṭam-api vikaset	Reality also is (seen) clearly
kṛṣṇa tasmai namaste	That (Reality) Krishna! Salutations to Thee
Even when this world is seen as existing, it is Thy nondual self in Reality, just as there is gold in all ornaments and clay in all earthen pots and vessels. Just as for a dreamer, on waking up, darkness vanishes, a worn out rope is seen clearly. When knowledge dawns, it becomes crystal clear through the total sublation of the objective world into Thyself, their substratum. To That Krishna! salutations.
yadbhītyodeti sūryo dahati ca dahano vāti vāyustathānye
yadbhītā: padmajādyā: punarucitabalīnāharante'nukālam |
yenaivāropitā: prāṅnijapadamapi te cyāvitāraśca paścāt
tasmai viśvaṃ niyantre vayamapi bhavate kṛṣṇa kurma: praṇāmam ||8||
yat-bhītyā-udeti sūrya:	by whose fear rises the sun
dahati ca dahana:	and burns fire
vāti vāyu:-tathā-anye	blows wind, and others
yat-bhītā: padmaja-ādyā:	by fearing (whom) Brahmaa and others
puna:-ucita-balīn-	again appropriate offerings
āharante-anukālaṃ	bring at proper time
yena-eva-āropitā:	by whom alone are raised,
prāk-nija-padam-api	first, to their own status also
te cyāvitāra:-ca paścāt	and they are removed later
tasmai viśvaṃ niyantre	to that world Controller
vayam-api bhavate kṛṣṇa	we also to Thee O Krishna
kurma: praṇāmam	make prostrations
Fearing whom the sun rises, the fire burns, the wind blows, and Brahmaa and others bring appropriate offerings (perform their functions) at the proper time. By whom alone they are raised to their places at the beginning of creation and later removed. To That Controller of the world! To Thee Krishna! we make prostrations.
trailokyaṃ bhāvayantaṃ triguṇamayamidaṃ tryakṣarasyaikavācyaṃ
trīśānāmaikyarūpaṃ tribhirapi nigamairgīyamānasvarūpam |
tisrovasthā vidantaṃ triyugajanijuṣaṃ trikramākrāntaviśvaṃ
traikālye bhedahīnaṃ tribhirahamaniśaṃ yogabhedairbhaje tvām ||9||
trailokyaṃ bhāvayantaṃ	the three worlds creating
triguṇamayam-idaṃ	comprising of three gunas, this
tryakṣarasya-aikavācyaṃ	of the three letters one and only meaning
tri-īśānām-aikyarūpam	of the three Deities one and only form
tribhi:api nigamai:-	by the three Vedas also
gīyamāna-svarūpam	is sung Thy true nature
tisra:-avasthā vidantaṃ	the three states knowing
triyuga-jani-juṣaṃ	in the three Yugas taking incarnation
tri-krama-ākrānta-viśvaṃ	in three steps covers the world
traikālye bhedahīnaṃ	in the three periods of time who is unchanged
tribhi:-aham-aniśaṃ	by three, I always
yogabhedai:-bhaje tvām	different Yogas, worship Thee
Thou do manifest the three worlds comprising of the three gunas. Thou alone are the meaning of the word made up of the three letters (AUM). Thou are one manifestation as the Trinity - Brahmaa Vishnu and Shiva. Thy true nature is sung of by the three Vedas. Thou as pure consciousness are aware of the three states of waking dream and sleep. Thou do take incarnation in the three Yugas, and cover the whole world in three strides. In the three periods of time - past present and future, Thou are unchanged. I always worship Thee by the means of three yogas - Gyaan, Bhakti and Karma.
satyaṃ śuddhaṃ vibuddhaṃ jayati tava vapurnityamuktaṃ nirīhaṃ
nirdvandvaṃ nirvikāraṃ nikhilaguṇagaṇavyañjanādhārabhūtam |
nirmūlaṃ nirmalaṃ tanniravadhimahimollāsi nirlīnamanta-
rnissaṅgānāṃ munīnāṃ nirupamaparamānandasāndraprakāśam ||10||
satyaṃ śuddhaṃ vibuddhaṃ	eternal, pure, ever awake
jayati tava vapu:-	shines Thy form
nitya-muktaṃ nirīhaṃ	ever free, desireless
nirdvandvaṃ nirvikāraṃ	beyond opposites, changeless
nikhila guṇa-gaṇa-	all values (good qualities)
vyañjana-ādhāra-bhūtam	manifesting and holding, the source
nirmūlaṃ nirmalaṃ tat-	causeless, taintless (free from ignorance)
niravadhi-mahima-ullāsi	limitless glory resplendent (shining)
nirlīnam-anta:-	latent in the hearts
nissaṅgānām munīnāṃ	of attachment free sages
nirupama-parama-ānanda-	unparalleled blissful conscious
sāndra-prakāśam	concentrated illuminating
Eternal, pure, ever awake, shines Thy Being, ever free, desireless, beyond opposites, changeless, the source of manifesting and holding of all values and good qualities, causeless, taintless from ignorance, emanating limitless glory, latent in the hearts of the non attached, luminous with the light of concentrated Supreme Bliss.
durvāraṃ dvādaśāraṃ triśataparimilatṣaṣṭiparvābhivītaṃ
sambhrāmyat krūravegaṃ kṣaṇamanu jagadācchidya sandhāvamānam |
cakraṃ te kālarūpaṃ vyathayatu na tu māṃ tvatpadaikāvalambaṃ
viṣṇo kāruṇyasindho pavanapurapate pāhi sarvāmayaughāt ||11||
durvāraṃ dvādaśa-āraṃ	irreversible, with twelve spokes (12 months)
triśata-parimilat-ṣaṣṭi-	with three hundred combined sixty
parva-abhivītaṃ	limbs, (360 teeth or days) constituting
sambhrāmyat krūra-vegaṃ	whirling with fierce speed
kṣaṇamanu jagat-ācchidya	every moment the universe cutting
sandhāvamānaṃ	running (forward)
cakraṃ te kālarūpaṃ	Thy wheel of time
vyathayatu na tu māṃ	torment it may not me
tvat-padaika-avalambaṃ	Thy feet alone the refuge (to whom)
viṣṇo kāruṇyasindho	O Vishnu! O Ocean of Compassion!
pavanapurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
pāhi-sarva-āmaya-aughāt	save (me) from the ailments altogether
O Vishnu! Thy irreversible wheel of time with its twelve spokes(months),and 360 teeth (days), whirling with ferocious speed, cutting the universe every moment , and running forward, may it not torment me, whose only refuge is at Thy feet. O Ocean of Compassion! O Lord of Guruvaayur! save me from my hosts of ailments.